(atmospheric music)
How any of you have noticed the
cycles of abuse that play out from one generation
of family members to another?
And how often do we watch in bewilderment, thinking,
"Why would they do that to their son, when the father
did the same to them?"
They know the pain.
Cynthia James was the product of five generations
of abusive behavior against the women in her bloodline.
But the cycle stopped with her.
After a lifetime of pain, followed by gaining
two Masters degrees, one in psychospiritual healing,
she realized that enter into family agreements
to heal that which has not been healed.
Cynthia, as the pressure around the world mounts,
and I'm talking about everything from political structures
to financial and economic structures,
to birds falling out on the fly and
buffaloes and cows dying.
People are beginning to feel a certain kind of
tension and anxiety and we hear from people
around the world that this is beginning to affect them.
And when that happens,
in which we get into your specialty now,
people's subconcsious programs become very
close to the surface and vulnerable.
Where in good times, you can kind of
stave it off a bit.
And I am interested in talking to you about this because
you have been through it all
and generations of your women, the women in your family
have been through it all,
and found your way out of this.
And we need to talk about genuine skills
on a psychospiritual level verse coping
with this type of stress so we don't
end up killing each other as this continues developing.
And your family is a beautiful example of
incarnation patterns, DNA, abuse
and finding your way out.
And can you give us some of that?
Can you give us a little background?
Yeah, I was going through a Masters program
in Spiritual Psychology at the University of Santa Monica
and part of the curriculum was we had to do a genogram.
And so, I had my grandmother's journals,
I was talking to my mother, I mean I,
my aunts, and I started tracing five
generations of women had been abused, violated.
My great, great grandmother had been raped on a hill
by a slave master in front of everyone and
conceived a child, and of course,
you know.
Gave me the chills.
Yeah.
So treated the child, hated the child, of course.
Right.
And so, I didn't know at that time,
because I hadn't delved deep into what I do today,
that those patterns just got carried on
and when I started tracking, there were even
similar experiences.
My father, my mother's father would lock her
underneath the house for punishment.
And when I was a three year old, the woman who took
care of me would lock me in the basement.
Now what that said to me is that
there was energetics in the body that were
attracting itself.
And what I learned was is that, when a wound happens,
the natural state of the whole body and your
energetic, your soul, is to like bring it back to wholeness.
But if something happens and it's strong enough,
and you make a decision,
an intellectual or a spiritual or emotional decision,
it keeps attracting itself until it heals.
Yes.
So five generations of women and at one point,
you know,
my path of discovery has been relationships,
and so after relationship after relationship, I was like oh
Seeing a few patterns?
Yes, exactly! And the common thread is me.
And it was like, okay.
So I need to get to the fact that
there's something in me that needs to be healed.
And if that quantum physicists are right,
and there's no time and space,
if I heal, I affect the patterns of all the
generations before me and those to come.
And so that started my work.
That's a really profound place to come from
as a context for your work.
Absolutely.
And I think everybody watching this
has watched some of the other interviews
and read a great enough amount that they understand
the depth of that statement that you just made.
And so let's begin from there, where you have
a bruise that's very deep trauma within the being.
And let's take again the milieu of the times,
which is a lot of stress.
Right.
Say maybe you just lost your job,
meaning you have to leave your house and downsize
because perhaps that's also put your house in jeopardy.
And look at a normal scenario developing in society today.
And then let's take a couple of examples
that may be fictitious or that you know of at this time.
And how that, what the started triggering in the person.
And then, what goes from there.
I want to start by saying that, everything that you're
saying is accurate.
I mean the energy, we're living in an accelerated
amazing time on this planet.
And I really believe that we all chose to be here
at this time.
Yes.
And there is something in me,
when I have these conversations
that's very calm, because I don't think that it's bad.
I think that what's happening is that
there's a transformation beyond what we could
possibly ever imagine
Absolutely.
So the experience of it
becomes our opportunity
to stand in another place.
And so, those triggers are just indicators for me
that say, okay, are you willing,
or how willing are you,
to go deep into your psyche,
and to your wellness center
and call up who you came here to be?
And I think it's an essence of remembrance.
It's a process of learning
that we are here to do this work
on a lot of different levels.
You can not just do it on an intellectual level.
You know, otherwise all the self-help books
that have flown off the shelves,
we'd all be, like enlightened, you know.
Right.
So that, it's not happening, so, so the thing is
is that we have to learn and have those a-has,
but then we have to go into the understanding that there's a
mind-body connection, we have to challenge and change those
energetic centers and what they mean to us
because they will continue to vibrate and attract
themselves until we do.
They will. I see it all around me.
I see it in me.
Exactly.
And when you start looking, those patterns
just recycle and recycle and recycle.
And they escalate.
And they escalate until you wake up,
and some people call it the spiritual 2x4,
but until you wake up and say, okay, I am called
to do this differently.
What's it going to take, and I willing to walk
through the fire?
And that for me, I had to walk through the fire
of my beliefs, my choices,
the self-sabotage, the lack of self-esteem.
All of that.
Because my mother, in an act,
or trying to get out of the patterns,
married a man who was excruciatingly violent to her,
sexually abused me, I mean the house was chaotic.
And so, at six years old, you think that's normal.
And so you start encoding all that stuff
and you really unconsciously look for it
because it's what's familiar.
And so I just kept creating, over and over,
chaotic, violent relationships until I said, you know,
maybe there's something more.
And when I walked on the spiritual path,
and said, oh.
Well, if God is real and loves me,
and love is the essence of everything,
why am I experiencing this other stuff?
There is something in me that thinks
that that is what I am supposed to have
as opposed to the truth of who I came here to be.
And doesn't that really play into
the word resonance?
Yes.
There's a resonance field that's created on a
on a quantum physics level, on a vibrational level,
to magnetize that experience again and again.
Absolutely.
Well in the quantum field, there's all
these possibilities.
Yes.
And if you don't know that there's a possibliity for
wholeness, love, happiness, and peace,
you choose what you're familiar with.
And it was striking to me that,
that there was a whole nother world
of love and possibility and joy and creativity
that would, you know, spark up,
or peek its head out at certain times.
And it was so scary to be that visible,
because visibility for me was about pain,
to be that visible meant oh no, I'd better
go back over here or self-sabotage.
I mean, if I told you all the wonderful
opportunities that were offered to me
as a young woman, because I really,
I have a personality and an energetic field
that attracts, but it was so scary
that I would run the other way.
And it want on for years.
Yes. Where you could've been
kind of jumping on your path earlier.
But again, everything in its divine time.
Absolutely, absolutely.
So, where did you start getting the glimpses
of that field that you call more unconditional
and love-filled or joy-filled, that didn't have
the pain associated with it?
Where were your first glimpses of that?
You know, I, it was out of pain.
I was, a relationship was ending and there
was a woman who actually was in a relationship
with someone that I knew.
And she really had a psychic energy, but I didn't
really totally understand that at this time.
And she said to me, "You are at a crossroads.
And if you choose the light,
you have no idea what your life will be."
I'm getting chills again.
I know.
It was striking.
And, um, I was singing in a choir
and I was going on and on with this woman about
my life and what was working and how this man left me
and she was tired of me.
And she said, "Read this."
And she handed me a book,
and it was "The Game of Life and How to Play It"
by Florence Scovel Shinn, who was a transcendentalist
and wrote this book in the early 1900s.
And I'm reading this book and I'm thinking,
you know I've thought about this stuff.
And at the same time, this woman who was a psychic
said, "You know, there's this spiritual community
in Los Angeles,
and it's called Guidance Church."
And Dr. Dan Morgan is the minister and you might
want to go there."
And I, you know, I don't know how I dragged
myself there, but I did.
And when I walked in, he's standing on this platform,
he's speaking without notes, and he's
talking about transformation.
And he's talking about living a life
that you can be responsible for
your choices and change your thinking.
That man, his whole community was all
these incredible teachers, one of which was
Michael Bernard Beckwith.
Yes.
And I went, oh.
There's something here for me and so I dived in
and I would show up to classes in my baseball hat
and no make-up, I mean, because I was in so much pain,
but there was something there.
A glimmer that said, "You're more than this.
You're more than this pain and this old way of being.
And what if you could choose another way?"
And that's the, that's the interesting
part right there, is what if you could choose differently,
because then again, all those subconscious programs of
lack of self-worth would tend to jump up at that point
and say, "You think you can choose that?"
Right.
And so, how did that work for you?
You know, it was an evolution, but I really
became to believe and still do, that freedom's a choice.
Yes.
And so, when I started
looking at my life,
I mean I stumbled at first and I want anybody
to know who's listening to this, you know, you don't
just leap to enlightenment.
But I started understanding that I could say no to things
that didn't support me.
That I was highly intuitive and that my body was
highly intuitive.
And so when something was not right,
my body would respond and I could learn to listen to it.
And learn to take care of myself.
And it was, it was a wonderful thing because
I started getting that, oh
I am really a co-creator with Spirit.
And if the Universe is always pouring out its abundance
and its fullness, I'm a part of that, and so I can
choose it for me.
And I can also choose to say no
for stuff that is not right for my health and
my well-being.
And this, uh, listening to the body is actually
much closer indicator of what's going on
in terms of actually allowing youself to listen to your
true self and the soul portion, spirit portion,
whatever you want to call it.
It can speak to us more clearly through the body
initially, than any thing else.
Certainly more reliably than through the mind or the
emotions.
Did you work, continue working with how it was
feeling in your body and what was the process
from there, because I want to get into the thing
that you talk about, which is, the vortices
inside the body.
I mean, we're in Sedona.
There are vortices all around us.
But you talk about having to clear the vortices
within the physical body
Right.
in order to start moving the healing along.
So that's a long-winded question,
but kind of going back to this, this connection
between your spirit and your body and
when you started knowing what it was
that was speaking to you.
Yeah, um, my solar plexus was the first place.
And it, when something did not feel right,
there would be a constriction.
And I would ignore it sometimes and than I would
end up in some place that was not great for me.
And I started looking at the correlation.
Oh, if that happens, it's really a call for me to pause.
It's a pause for me to say, what's going on,
what's really happening here.
And, so little by little, I started doing that.
Now that was the good news.
The interesting news is that
it freaked people out that were in a relationship with me
because I changed the dance.
Right.
And I would go, "You know, that doesn't feel right to me."
Or if somebody would tell me something, I would go,
"I don't know. I'm not saying you're lying, but
something's off here," you know.
And it started really pushing people
and I started getting that because I was raising
this vibration within myself and learning to listen,
some people would leave, which was very
scary for me cause abandonment was a big issue.
But I was like, well, if they leave, am I creating space
for something else?
And so it was this kind of interesting dance that went on.
But the more that I listened, I could literally
feel the exhale in my body.
The opening in my solar plexus and my heart.
My throat was another place.
It would constrict because I had choked my voice
down because I was this creative child
and when I would speak up in the home,
it was a violent response.
So I learned to pull it back.
To open it up, and to let that energy feel open,
was extraordinarily scary, and so my throat would
constrict and my jaws would get tight.
And I find with the people that I work with today,
you can literally see the constriction happen
when they're getting ready to open that space.
Yeah. And it takes a lot of courage to act on it.
Like it's, at first you feel it, like you said, you had
to have the courage to act on it.
At what point in this did you feel a lightening
of your entire field in a type of, a new sense of
personal truth move in to the point where
you could confront your own past?
And even your mother, and whoever was remaining
of the women in the five generations.
You know, it was a process.
There was a moment at one point where I was like,
oh, I'm different.
But it was little increments
And I think that's important to know.
That these little steps add up to a transformation.
Yes.
And so, I started, I went to workshops, I went to classes,
I started really doing a lot of educating myself
and taking classes about how do I work with this energy?
When something's constricted, it is giving me
information.
There's a language in the body.
How do I learn that language, because the way
I was brought up didn't teach me to do that?
So how, what's it trying to tell me?
And so that I can start listening.
Now, when something's in the room that's not right,
I address it immediately.
I go, I'm not feeling right in my body.
Let's talk about this.
But that, I learned it along along the way and I
it was extraordinarily scary
because I really
I wanted to be seen and loved and validated more than
anything because that wasn't the experience as
a child.
And so, to really open that space and say,
"Even if you don't like this, even if you can't accept
me in this moment, I have to trust this, because
I've learned the language of my body and I trust it."
How about with your step-father?
Sexual abuse is big.
The women can, you can go back and you can redress it
and say, I didn't feel safe in my own home.
And deal with the women and go through what has to
happen between the two of you.
But what about the other end of it, where you're
talking about the man and the sexual abuse?
How in your being, what did it take to move through that
and let that part go?
And again, I've not been through that, so I don't
understand the dynamic when you're so young
that this seems almost normal.
And I've interviewed a couple people,
Cathy O'Brien and a couple others,
who became normal for them.
So it's hard for people, like me, to really understand.
How would that kind of betrayal, how would you
work with that kind and let it go?
How did it work there?
Well, you kind of get cut in half.
You know, we are sexual beings.
We come in with those natural instincts.
And so a part of you is having the experience
of what is a natural instinct, even though
there's something going, "this is not right."
Yeah.
And then when you find out, whoa this really wasn't
right, then you start questioning, who are you.
I remember several times, I would have these
wonderful connections with people,
and as long as the sex didn't mean anything,
it was great.
But if they wanted to move to a place of intimacy,
the thought was, "oh no.
You can not trust that. You're not safe."
It would shut down.
And so I went thorough a lot of energy work
in opening that part of my body and really,
first of all grieving at the death of my innocence.
And the beauty of a child, you know, just being able to play
and allowing that sexuality to grow into itself.
Um.
Isn't it funny, I feel emotional.
Yeah.
Um.
You didn't get that opportunity.
Yeah.
And so I had to do a lot of forgiveness work,
a lot of energy clearing work, and I had to
really move into a place of,
that I deserved to be loved.
And I deserve to share it, mentally, emotionally,
physically, sexually.
And when I,
before I met my husband,
you know I'd been through a lot of
relationships and marriages and I,
I went on hiatus from all of that and said,
I've got to do my own healing work.
And so, my husband is
an outpicturing of the shift in my consciousness
and my ability to trust.
Trust God, Source, and me.
And therefore, I could let him in.
Well, that's wonderful that the trust was
inherent to the relationship.
Absolutely.
Were you able to ultimately forgive
and remove the blocked vortices in your body
from your experience as a child with you step-dad?
Yeah, you know I did a, I used to be an actress,
and I did a one-woman show called "The Hand of God."
And it was all about this journey and, you know,
I found out through my own conversations
with my mother that he had been abused
and come from really
Sure.
dysfunction
usually that's the case.
Exactly.
And um, and so,
I did this process where
actually it was a woman, I was on a massage table,
and she was a person that did really deep energy work
with people.
And while she's working on me, she said,
"Someone has come into the room that wants to talk to you."
And immediately I saw him.
I saw he was in a suit and he had a hat.
And she said, "He's in a suit with a hat."
And I go, yeah.
And I said, it's my step-father.
And she said, 'Do you want to talk to him?"
And I said, okay.
So he said, he'd passed on to the other side.
He said, "So I'm here because I want to apologize
for what I did to you."
And he said, "I want you to know that it is
important that you let me go.
That you are holding on to me
with your consciousness.
You're linked in to me and I'm asking that
you give permissions for the angels to cut the cord
with golden scissors."
And, you know at first, I was like, please.
You are not in Heaven and there's no angels.
You know, I mean I was in that place.
Yeah.
But then it was, oh this is really about
forgiveness and letting go.
So that he can be free and I can be free.
Yes. Break the resonance.
Exactly.
And so it was, it was huge.
Um, that became the end of my play.
And so that I could say to people, you know,
this, you can drag this energy,
this story, these people,
as long as you want, but when you cut that cord,
there's an inherent freedom in it.
Absolutely. That's beautiful and thank you
for sharing that with us.
I know that's tender.
Going back to the incarnation patterns,
going back into the large picture, you chose this family
to incarnate into, you chose this for your own healing.
And so that you can help so many others go through
the same process.
So now let's take that and go into,
in this process of embodying these bodies
in our DNA and all of this that gets coded in the mix.
This shows up as you talked about earlier
within the vortices within the body.
Let's talk about anybody out there who's listening
and resonating and the world and the energies,
the prevailing energies are pushing them to the max.
And now the programs are running.
And something has to be done, where do you begin?
You know, um, I'm talking about this at the conference.
I think that there has to be a soul remembrance
of why you are really here.
Because we are here, really, to support the
change and the shift on this planet.
And so when you get clear about that, then
you get to say, okay,
is this story that I've been telling,
running, whatever it is, is it defining me?
Because if it's defining you based on
where you've been, what's happened, whatever
the experience, whatever that is.
If that's the case, you can not step into your destiny.
You can not step into your purpose
because you're cycling in that place
And so it takes a willingness to let go of that story.
And to start clearing out the energetic fields,
the chakras, the belief systems.
And sometimes that's classes,
sometimes that's meditation,
a spiritual practice is essential.
I mean, I really feel that for everyone who's
going through stuff on this planet,
expand the container.
And that means, upleveling your spiritual practice.
Meditating more, praying more, yoga more,
work the body.
I mean, all of that stuff, because until you can
expand that container, you can not hold
the energy that is cycling and moving on this planet.
That makes sense.
So where, so let's say we,
let's say someone watching
that is relating to this, already has their practice.
But maybe has not identified what the direct
experience of their true self feels like.
Because this can be very subtle and often not
recognized, in most cases, in most humans.
It's never recognized overtly.
So let's talk about how you begin fostering and
recognizing that connection, which then allows for
the message of the true, true purpose
on the planet.
Well,
we're actually made up of light.
And so if you were in this moment, just to sit
right where you were and close your eyes
and start to breathe light into your heart
and exhale love into this space.
And you do that over a period of time, all of
a sudden you start to experience that the love
and the light are the same thing.
And that that energy is not just coming from the
inside out, but it's coming from the outside in
and it's cycling.
And you start to realize that that is who you are.
The body holds it, experiences of your life
are the experiences, but you are that essence.
And there is something amazing.
In all meditation practices, they talk about you know, the,
you know, the breath, but it's a really powerful tool.
Because when you start breathing in light
into the heart, because the heart is contextual,
when you start doing that, all of a sudden,
there is this exhale and energetically it will drop you
into this field of peace and love which is
everywhere present.
And in there, you discover who you are.
And in there, you can heal all ways of being.
So let's say we've gone that far.
Okay.
And now, just because it's happened,
you've found this and you know you can do that, and even
you know why you're here.
You still have the subconscious programs and
something's been triggered.
Someone has treated you in a way that is
your hotspot.
And you find all this work, you feel like a failure
because you're falling right back into the fear, anger,
whatever it is you fall into.
Resentment, jealousy.
Whatever the buzz is.
And now, where do you start working
with the vortices and such after that?
Okay.
The tendency is to run from it.
You gotta go into it.
The tendency is to withdraw and try to pray it away,
think it away, write it away, sex it away.
Not feel it.
Exactly.
But here's the thing.
We are really called to go into it because
at the core of it is the peace and the harmony.
Now, what that doesn't mean is allowing the
emotions to take us off and go into
Do their trip.
Exactly.
Yeah.
It really means to go deep into that feeling, and
if you, let's say that that you feel betrayed.
If you really close your eyes and say,
where does that betrayal live in my body,
it will tell you.
A lot of times, it's throat or heart or solar plexus.
But, um,
and then you allow yourself to just
start energetically going into that space in the body.
If you keep doing that, using light, it will
start to break apart that energy and it will drop you
into the field of peace and love.
And in there, it will take you back to
the place that is wanting to be healed and transformed.
And do you use breath at that point?
Do you continue breathing through?
Stay calm and still and go into it and just keep breathing?
You can.
But the use of light.
I tell people to imagine that there's a
laser beam of light that's filled with love and truth
and love and truth and there's nothing more powerful.
And you use that to dive thorugh.
Let's say that your throat feels like it's constricted.
And it's dense energy.
That if you find the center of that energy
and you allow that light laser beam to keep
cutting through it and be patient.
Cause some people can go right through it.
Some people it takes longer cause
it's been there a long time.
But if you let that go right in there,
over a little bit of time, it will break it down
until you drop into that place.
And then you start to get, oh.
There's something in here that wants to be healed.
And it will take you there.
So, as we discover it, it speaks to us
through the body.
And what happens at that point when it speaks to us?
When it speaks to us, it shows us what it is.
And perhaps you even have an opportunity
to look at what has fed into it, via past events
and so forth.
And then you have to have the willingness to not let
it be your story any more because maybe
there's been a benefit in that, right?
Right.
Lot of sympathy, you know, and so forth.
So what comes then?
Forgiveness.
In the final.
Forgiveness of yourself first or others?
Well you know, it's really, really
where spirit is concerned, there's nothing to forgive.
Everything is just energy and information.
Yeah.
But for us, it's the perceptions and the judgements that
come with it.
So the forgiveness is really about,
how have I perceived it?
What have I judged of myself and others?
And a lot of times, it's the same thing.
I mean, I judge you for betraying me,
but how many times have I betrayed myself?
I judge you for abusing me, but how many times
have I abused myself?
So it's really a process, a dual process of forgiving
the judgements of others and yourself.
And then, and then choosing.
Because I know people who go through these
forgiveness processes all the time.
But then they don't choose differently
and they're right back in it.
Right.
So it, it works in tandem.
Because maybe the benefits are still
Exactly.
there for them.
So we have to really, this you said earlier,
we have to be willing to let go of the story.
As our identity.
And people's stories are their identity oftentimes, right?
Well yes, but you know that's why I started with
this remembering who you are.
If I really am a being of light.
If I really am here to bring my gifts.
If I'm a divine idea,
then I'm unique and I'm magnificent.
So that means, then, that this identity with this
other stuff is slowing down what I came
here to do.
And, I have to be willing to go through the discomfort
of letting it go so that I can allow this other thing
to blossom.
Because the people around you
oftentimes relate to that story.
That's their connection to you.
Yeah, your tribe.
You can crate a whole tribe around it.
You know, I mean, I can not tell you
how many victims I had in my life
and we just loved to call each other.
So you have to be willing to let go of
what had been close relationships and such.
I mean, there is an effect that has to be addressed
as you move on and lighten your field,
refine yourself.
But let's look at the other side of it then.
As you do that, and you've gone through this
process, I just, I call it a process, of refinement
of the being.
And you're now on the other side of that or
well into it, what starts happening by way of resonance?
I mean, obviously your husband is one of them, but
what happens then
You're one of them.
to your world?
Yes.
That's right.
I'm sitting here with you
Yes.
We are a reflection of it.
Yeah.
And that's what starts happening to your world.
Everywhere.
Yeah.
I mean, in stores,
in restaurants, in social gatherings, in, I mean.
When I got the call about doing this with you,
and started looking at who you are, I was like,
oh wow yeah.
I mean, there's another sister on the planet.
You know what I mean?
Yes.
We start, and Ithink that one of the things
that's happening in this whole enrgetic
shift is that the tribe, the Universal tribe
is finding itself, and we are coming together
in huge form.
You bet.
You bet. Little chills again.
(laughs)
Absolutely.
And so, when you look back on this journey,
you've had a couple different lives in one.
I mean, that's really the beauty of it,
is you're kind of knocking through a few lives
at one time.
Exactly.
The choice to take it on,
accelerate it, and heal it.
And, it seems to me,
there's not been a time in history
more appropriate for each one of
us to do this.
Absolutely.
To take on and develop ourselves to the
extent where we can look at it like, that was
lifetimes ago within a lifetime.
Right.
So.
As we've kind of moved through this journey a bit,
and we'll encourage people to find you.
And you have, you have your book, you have CDs,
all of this that people can connect in with to
have that support and hear your voice
as they go through their own process.
Any final thoughts on whatever it is we need to hear
before we sign off here?
I believe you're a masterpiece.
I believe you're a masterpiece in the making
that you are being painted, sung, written, talked.
And answer your call.
There is something that you came to do,
that no one else can do.
Do not let anything or anyone detour you.
I do not care what it looks like.
I don't care what's happened.
Say yes to your life and life will say
yes to you in a way that you can not even imagine.
Well that's a, a beautiful parting gift
for each person taking that on for themselves.
And I thank you so much for your time, Cynthia.
Thank you.
If some of these themes have permeated your
own family experience and relationships, you can work with
Cynthia through her books, her audio tapes, or
reach her through her website at cynthiajames.net.
Meanwhile, you might also enjoy our
interview with Byron Katie, in which she
helps us begin delving into what's true
versus what we believe to be true.
Until next time, thanks for watching CMN.
(atmospheric music)